## hpr0380 :: Troubleshooting Blue screens of Death

 
Debugging Tools link

Some Common STOP codes: Bug Check 0xA: IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL  The 
IRQL_NOT_LESS_OR_EQUAL bug check has a value of 0x0000000A. This indicates that 
Microsoft Windows or a kernel-mode driver accessed paged memory at 
DISPATCH_LEVEL or above.  The following parameters are displayed on 
the blue screen. Parameter Description 1 Memory referenced 2 IRQL at time of 
reference 3 0: Read 1: Write 4 Address which referenced memory Cause This bug 
check is issued if paged memory (or invalid memory) is accessed when the IRQL is 
too high. The error that generates this bug check usually occurs after the 
installation of a faulty device driver, system service, or BIOS. If you 
encounter bug check 0xA while upgrading to a later version of Windows, this 
error might be caused by a device driver, a system service, a virus scanner, or 
a backup tool that is incompatible with the new version.
If a kernel debugger is available, obtain a stack trace.


 To resolve an error caused by a faulty device driver, system service, or BIOS 1. Restart your 
computer. 2. Press F8 at the character-based menu that displays the operating 
system choices. 3. Select the Last Known Good Configuration option from the 
Windows Advanced Options menu. This option is most effective when only one 
driver or service is added at a time.  To resolve an error caused by an 
incompatible device driver, system service, virus scanner, or backup tool 1. 
Check the System Log in Event Viewer for error messages that might identify the 
device or driver that caused the error. 2. Try disabling memory caching of the 
BIOS. 3. Run the hardware diagnostics supplied by the system manufacturer, 
especially the memory scanner. For details on these procedures, see the owner's 
manual for your computer. 4. Make sure the latest Service Pack is installed. 5. 
If your system has small computer system interface (SCSI) adapters, contact the 
adapter manufacturer to obtain updated Windows drivers. Try disabling sync 
negotiation in the SCSI BIOS, checking the cabling and the SCSI IDs of each 
device, and confirming proper termination. 6. For integrated device electronics 
(IDE) devices, define the onboard IDE port as Primary only. Also, check each IDE 
device for the proper master/subordinate/stand-alone setting. Try removing all 
IDE devices except for hard disks. If the message appears during an installation 
of Windows, make sure that the computer and all installed peripherals are listed 
in the Microsoft Windows Marketplace Tested Products List.Â 

Other stop codes can be found at 
Interpreting Bug Check Codes